---
layout: page
title:  "The Affirmative Information Policy: Opening Up a Closed City"
---

Source:
P. Clavel and W. Wiewel, eds, *Harold Washington and the Neighbourhoods: Progressive City Government in Chicago* 1983-1987. New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press, 1991.


# The Affirmative Information Policy: Opening Up a Closed City 
### JOHN KRETZMANN  

The election of
[Harold Washington](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Harold_Washington)
shook Chicago's governmental and political structures to their very
foundations. Long-accepted policies and practices, not the least of
which was government's habitual secrecy, were suddenly open to
scrutiny and debate. In fact, one of the first major challenges facing
the new Washington administration in 1983 involved prying open the
doors and windows of a government in the back room for half a century,
whose business had been conducted in private, and in which public
participation in policy formation was considered anathema. The
populist orientation of Washington's movement-style campaign virtually
guaranteed that this closed and secretive system would be exposed and
challenged.

In fact, Washington's populist campaign themes, backed by strong
neighborhood-based demands for increased citizen participation, set
the context for creating policies that signaled not simply an open
government but an invitational one. This account will touch on a
number of these participation strategies but will concentrate on one
particularly innovative thrust which came to be called Affirmative
Neighborhood Information.

This approach was conceived basically as a systematic response to the
shortcomings of Freedom of Information Acts when viewed from the
perspective of the empowerment agenda articulated by community
organizations in consort with a populist-oriented city administration.

My own involvement in the development of a set of inventive
information-related policies for the Washington administration grew
out of a neighborhood-oriented information project at Northwestern
University's Center for Urban Affairs and Policy
Research.<sup>[1](#footnote1)</sup> From that base, an action research
team had collaborated with a number of community organizations in
Chicago to experiment with ways of collecting and using
neighborhood-specific data. Some of our work had introduced
microcomputers into the organizations and had experimented with new
ways of making data easily digestible. Involvement in the Washington
campaign

[couple of pages missing]

City council members who were active in the Daley years provided at
least a partial listing of the most common techniques used by the
mayor and his legislative leaders to thwart the flow of information in
the council:

* Titles of ordinances were vague and contained little information
  about the contents of the bills.
* Ordinances were often introduced and called up for a vote on the same day. 
* City council leaders resisted the introduction of an ordinance
  numbering system.
* Leaders frequently slipped something controversial through the
  council by making it part of an "omnibus" package.

Given these consistent practices in pursuit of the protection of
information, it is ironic that the avenues for obtaining information
occasionally appeared to be more accessible to the antimachine
independents in the council. "They didn't care about making noise and
making enemies," explained a machine stalwart. "They could raise hell,
go public, go to the media, and maybe they'd get
something."<sup>[10](#footnote10)</sup> One independent reported
constructing an elaborate set of procedures for keeping his own
records of council legislation and votes. Similarly, reporters and
representatives from civic and community groups occasionally found
that unfavorable publicity or legal action were successful strategies
for obtaining information about legislation.

This commitment to a closed flow of information persisted during the
Bilandic and Byrne administrations. Our interviews produced little
evidence that much, if anything, changed during this period. Perhaps
the clearest summary of the state of the city's information, both its
collection and its dissemination, at the conclusion of the Byrne
administration is contained in the Executive Summary of the first
volume of the Washington administration transition report, *Blueprint
of Chicago Government*. The report stresses throughout the extreme
difficulties encountered by the authors in their pursuit of
information. The "Findings" section begins:

> We have, in the process of this detailed investigation, discovered
> certain general conditions which are nearly universal in all of
> these municipal agencies.

> One of the most obvious and pervasive facts about Chicago city
> government that has repeatedly been evident in our research is that
> basic information needed to understand how the City works, to assess
> how we I services are provided and to determine who is responsible
> for various city programs is incredibly difficult to obtain. Simple
> questions like what an agency actually does, the total amount of
> money an agency spends, and the names of people who run the agency
> are difficult to answer. Getting even this simple descriptive
> information requires consulting several different sources, many of
> which are hard to decipher.<sup>[11](#footnote11)</sup>

## Modernizing Information Systems in the City

Against this backdrop of both bureaucratic and politically determined
secrecy, however, the numbers of professionally trained administrators
in Chicago government grew steadily during the Daley, Bilandic, and
Byrne years. One longtime city computer expert recalled, "I remember
it was about 1970 that I started to get piles of job applications from
people calling themselves 'systems analysts.' That was the time when I
think it really dawned on the powers that be that we couldn't really
keep track of the money and the personnel without drastically
upgrading our information capacities."<sup>[12](#footnote12)</sup>

But in Chicago, of course, these developments did not signal a final
shift from the old-style political mode of information management to
the new-style administrative, or "reform," mode. Rather they appeared
to lead to the existence, for at least a decade, of a peculiar
two-track system of information collection and use. On the one hand, a
number of agencies and departments, staffed increasingly with
technically trained administrators and information experts, collected
and stored "systems" data concerning their programs and
operations. These data, increasingly computerized, were reported as
required to the externally located bureaucracies, often federal, that
controlled and to some extent monitored program funds. In addition,
data were utilized internally for routine bureaucratic functions like
building inspections. At the same time, however, the older "political"
mode of handling information persisted. That is, privately held,
personally and informally communicated information continued to
determine, in many instances, what "really" happened in a department
or agency. Hiring and firing, budgeting and programming decisions
continued to be based almost entirely on the personal, political
calculus of the machine politicians—not on the administratively
defined needs of the particular department.

In Chicago, this two-track system for handling information existed in
precarious balance for considerably more than a decade. While it held
sway, it seemed to foster an extremely circumscribed, narrowly
utilitarian view of the politics of information. That is,
systematically collected information was most often thought of as
helpful neither to the departments themselves, except for routine
purposes, nor to clients or constituents, nor to
policymakers. Information collection constituted rather a set of
hurdles to be overcome mainly insofar as external agencies demanded
that they be overcome. Since virtually no important decisions were
connected with what was known or collected systematically, the data
often did not need to be timely, accurate, or relevant to decision
making.

Not surprisingly, and also not unique to Chicago, one of the outcomes
of this two-track approach to information was the gradual and almost
surreptitious development of an interdepartmental network of people
whose jobs involved the collection and analysis of data, and whose
inclinations were, as one department head put it, to "really *care*
about information." One important magnet that drew these people
together around it was in fact the city's Data Center, only
half-jokingly described by a city computer veteran as "a haven for
technical refugees from the Pacific
Northwest."<sup>[13](#footnote13)</sup>

Increasingly numerous, however, these information professionals
appeared to be politically isolated, considered marginal and
unimportant by the city's patronage work force. What possible
incentive existed for department workers who owed their positions to
their ward-based political activity to respond to distant supervisors
operating within a totally foreign and irrelevant administrative
framework? Insofar as the cooperation of workers is necessary for the
collection of accurate and timely data in a particular department,
these barriers were quite significant.

The isolation of the information professionals also limited the uses
to which data, once collected, were to be put. Politically connected
department heads were often both products and beneficiaries of the old
political style of decision making—or they were at least compelled to
adapt to it. Many were themselves familiar only with the oral,
informal style and lived by Daley's dictum that "good politics is good
government" and vice versa. Decisions were thus based on the calculus
of the political quid pro quo, requiring deep familiarity with a set
of "signals" and information almost totally divorced from
systematically collected data within a given department. The constant
care and feeding of the network of political obligations known as the
machine superseded all other criteria for decision making. There was
no place in this network for the information professionals, and little
outlet for their work internal to the departments. As a consequence,
information collected and reported by these isolated professionals was
quite often not even seen by department heads, who understandably
regarded it as irrelevant. Clearly these arrangements affected both
the quantity and the quality of the data collected.

## Openness and Participation: Two Key Themes in the Washington Campaign 

This, then, was the state of the "politics of information" in Chicago
as the city approached the mayoral campaign of 1983. But from the
outset of Washington's populist-oriented campaign the promise of "open
government" was a central theme. This commitment was expressed in an
early and oft-repeated pledge to issue an executive order on freedom
of information (FOI) on the first day of a Washington administration.

This emphasis upon FOI as the cornerstone of reform in Chicago
government was wholly understandable. Illinois had been the last state
to enact such an ordinance—it finally did so in 1983—and Chicago
virtually the last major city without one. The symbolic importance of
such a step would mark a significant break from past practices and
would in fact provide clear evidence of the reform intentions promised
by the new administration. Furthermore, powerful constituencies
extending beyond independent politicians were lined up behind the FOI
thrust. These included the press, as well as many important civic
organizations. Washington and his advisors were intimately familiar
with the legislative history of FOI acts and were clearly committed to
bringing the city in line with the rest of the country.

In addition, early in the Washington campaign, another seemingly
unrelated theme emerged, one which would open the possibility that the
government's approach to information policy might be extended
significantly beyond the standard FOI conception. This second theme
held out the promise that citizen participation would become the
hallmark of this particular, populist version of reform and that
local, neighborhood-based activity would be nurtured and validated.

The emphasis on neighborhood initiatives and citizen participation in
the Washington campaign reflected accurately the perspectives of many
of the key figures involved in the often disorganized, chronically
underfunded, yet highly energetic Washington effort. Many of the field
organizers and members of the policy formation team brought years of
antimachine activity to their campaign work. A group of about a dozen
staff and volunteers argued consistently for the kinds of decentralist
empowerment-oriented policies that reflected their extensive
experience in a variety of community organizing settings.

In fact, the voting blocks targeted by campaign strategists were made
up almost entirely of groups that could be expected to resonate
positively to the participation theme. First and foremost, of course,
came the necessity to knit together the disparate elements of the
black community into a uniform, activated base of support. Clearly the
participation theme was one key response to the almost universal
feeling among blacks that they had remained peripheral for too long.

In addition, the long-time community organization leadership in both
Latino and white areas of the city responded quickly and positively to
the emphasis on open governmental processes and local neighborhood
initiatives. Until the Washington campaign, most of these groups
shared an aversion to electoral political involvement. This aversion
was based on both experience and strategic principle. The shared
experience involved years of interaction and often conflict with the
closed nature of the patronage-based loced ward organizations. The
strategic presumptions, particularly for the activist multi-issue
groups, stressed the need to bring independently organized pressure to
bear continually upon all elected officials.

But the participation themes stressed by toe Washington effort proved
promising enough to break this pattern of electoral aloofness. Here
was a candidacy that did indeed look more like a populist movement
than a modern campaign, one which featured an unimpeachably
"progressive" candidate thrust into contention by an unprecedented
mobilization of the most excluded residents of the city. Further, the
platform expressed in *The Washington Papers* reflected not only the
*content* of a program favorable to local participation and
empowerment but also a *process* that had involved community
leadership centrally in its production.

If it were in fact possible that significant city resources would be
redirected from big downtown projects to the neighborhoods; and if a
new administration were to commit itself to open government in place of
the closed machine style; and if the developing proposals for active
neighborhood participation in planning and development were to be
implemented—then the context for local activity would be significantly
changed. Slowly and steadily during the Washington campaign, the
virulent and reality-based skepticism of many community groups began
to lift.

Even as community groups continued, with considerable success, to push
the Washington platform toward placing even stronger emphasis on the
participation theme, the constituencies backing FOI were also gaining
in both numbers and impact. "Secrecy" in the Jane Byrne administration
became a central issue in the primary campaign, and candidate Richard
M. Daley featured a commitment to FOI as prominently as did
Washington. And when, after his primary victory, Washington's
transition team began the attempt to collect data about Chicago's
governmental operations, the obstacles they encountered only served to
reinforce this pledge among key policy development insiders.

Still, the link between the commitments to open government and to
community participation had not been articulated. As community-based
actors talked about FOI they revealed that, in their views, a
traditionally construed FOI Act, however broadly drawn, would help
neighborhood group very little. Three basic limits of FOI presented
themselves. First, FOI is basically a statement of the willingness to
react and respond, not to initiate. Community-based organizations
(CBOs) would be the initiators. And few community-based groups
possessed the resources, in time or staff, to aggressively pursue data
that were physically distant and of unproved relevance to local
agendas. Civic organizations and coalitions located in the downtown
area, with adequate staff and a developed research agenda, could be
expected to join the press and some public officials in taking
advantage of the FOI opportunities—but not neighborhood-based
organizations.

The second limitation of FOI with respect to CBOs concerned the form
of the data that would be made available. FOI implied no obligation to
make information intelligible, let alone systematically useful for
community constituents. When it was obtained, it came in the form
collected and used by the department involved, not by anyone on the
outside; often, it required considerable expertise to "decode" and
make intelligible.

And finally, FOI presented community groups with an opportunity that
was ironically at odds with the overall policy directions of a
populist administration, one aimed at developing consistent
neighborhood policy in consort with active community
organizations. FOI policies respond most readily to tightly drawn
requests aimed at a single item or set of items. For CBOs, the
targeting of such discrete and specific information needs would be
most often embedded in a process of issue identification and action
that could be characterized as serial, disconnected, and frequently ad
hoc. Further, targeted lists of information obtained from the
government were more likely to be appropriate to a protest agenda than
to a development agenda. (For example, ownership of slum buildings had
been one commonly sought piece of information.)

Thus, from the point of view of CBOs, there was an irony in the
Washington campaign's commitment to FOI. These organizations were
being handed a tool whose utility was best suited to an adversarial
relationship with the public sector, but this tool was being offered
by an administration with a strong commitment to ending that kind of
relationship and to building CBOs' capacities to act for themselves in
partnership with the city administration.

New city officials from the Mayor's Press Office, the Data Center, the
Department of Neighborhoods, and the Budget Department joined
transition team members in the conviction that an "affirmative"
approach to information on the part of the new administration could
overcome these objections and was both feasible and sensible. The city
government collected and stored data covering a broad range of subject
areas. Some of it, no doubt, was potentially useful to constituencies
beyond the bureaucracies that collected it. Should it not be possible
to design a system for sorting out what was useful, for making it
understandable to "non-experts," and for making it available on an
"affirmative" basis (that is, proactively) to neighborhood groups?

The route from conceptualization of the project to its initiation,
however, was to prove circuitous indeed. All of the relevant actors,
both in the neighborhoods and in city government, needed to be
convinced that affirmative information was an innovation worth
pursuing, that in fact it extended their capacities for accomplishing
already existing objectives. Inside city hall this effort centered on
defining the Affirmative Neighborhood Information proposal in
relationship to the existing commitment to FOI.

With CBO leadership, discussions took place mainly within the context
of the transition team's efforts to define an overall approach to
neighborhood policy for the new administration. This latter set of
discussions had virtually nothing to do with "information needs,"
focusing instead on the definition of neighborhood needs, particularly
for resources, authority, and vehicles for participation in decision
making.

## CBOs in the Transition Process: Neighborhood Needs Begin to Include Information

During the transition process, which spanned the new mayor's first
months in office, two particular task forces drew widespread interest
and participation on the part of neighborhood groups: one focused on
policy recommendations in the housing area, and the other more
generally on neighborhood-oriented initiatives. The importance of
these efforts transcended the particular policy recommendations set
forth (although a sizable proportion of those were at least partially
implemented by the administration in its first year). Rather, these
task forces, and the forums and hearings that they convened, marked
for Chicago's CBOs their first officially sanctioned opportunity to
discuss needs and priorities across neighborhood boundaries, to
discover both common issues and significant differences, and to share
together some reasonable (yet often skeptical held) expectations that
a cooperative stance vis-a-vis city hall was possible.

Though they were themselves, obviously, important exercises in open
communication, none of the discussions within the transition process
focused directly on the information needs of communities. Yet valuable
lessons were learned that reconfirmed the importance of increasing
neighborhood access to and sophistication about city-held data. One
illustration of the way in which information needs entered these
discussions concerns that segment of the Neighborhood Task Force that
was to examine the possibilities for a formalized neighborhood
planning process. During these discussions, some of which I convened,
the wide variance in neighborhood-based capacities and interests was
made very clear. Sophisticated neighborhood organizations with
existing development capacities saw little need for an expanded city
role-in fact, such a role was seen as potentially competitive, a drain
on resources already cornered by the group. On the other hand, small,
struggling CBOs tended to welcome any and all forms of city initiative
in their neighborhoods, more or less on the theory that "anything is
better than nothing." The conclusion drawn from these divergent
viewpoints was in one way no conclusion at all—yet, in another, a very
important recognition of community diversity. The transition report
argued that no single formal system of neighborhood planning could
possibly satisfy everyone. But in addition to that decision to back
away from the universal installation of some form of Neighborhood
Planning Board came a closer examination of exactly what kinds of
resource the city could provide—resources that would aid both the
established and the struggling groups. In that context, information
came to be regarded as a more universal, nonthreatening commodity that
the city held and could distribute.

Thus CBOs began to raise their expectations concerning the information
programs of the city. They began, in fact, to constitute themselves as
an expanded marketplace for public information. Hundreds of community
representatives, for example, attended public hearings on the city's
fiscal year 1984 budget, and hundreds more a day-long forum with
administration officials on the Year X Community Development Block
Grant budget. The status of informed consumer of information clearly
appealed to CBOs across the city as the most logical and universal
position to take vis-a-vis the new administration, for it left open
the full range of local options for defining neighborhood-based
activity and response.

Though this general stance by CBOs fell short of the vision of full
support and partnership hoped for by some in the new administration,
it nonetheless represented a highly significant shift in the historic
relations between the neighborhoods and city hall. Expectations were
being heightened on each side, at least some of which began to center
on the expansion of shared information as the base on which to build
further partnership arrangements.

Meanwhile, inside the new city administration, officials were focusing
quite clearly on information issues, particularly the issuance of
Washington's oft-promised FOI executive order. But, not surprisingly,
complications appeared, delaying the order's appearance for some three
months.

How would the executive order be worded? What kinds of information
would it cover, and what kinds would it exclude? Where would
responsibility for its implementation be lodged, and how would it be
structured? The answers to these questions did not appear as a
rational construct, full blown at the inauguration, but rather emerged
gradually through a process of proposal, reaction, response, and
personnel shifts. The ad hoc nature of this process was consonant with
the overall mode of operation within the Washington administration
during its first year. And it was understandable, given the constant
shifting and redefinition of the political ground rules in Chicago's
politics.

In fact, during the administration's first year and a half, five
different persons served as the city's FOI officer, and each brought a
different set of perspectives and skills to the task. What they had in
common was a shared understanding of FOI as politically central to the
Washington definition of reform. Each had been an active participant
in the campaign and had absorbed the political importance of the
promise to "open up city government." If the new administration could
not deliver on that promise with some dispatch, a major chance for
maintaining credibility would be lost. Further, quick delivery on this
commitment seemed politically feasible, in a way which other
initiatives did not, since the problematic legislative approval
process could be bypassed, and authority could be lodged in an already
budgeted position within the Mayor's Office.

The first person appointed to the newly created position was an anti
machine former state legislator, James Houlihan, a lawyer with some
experience in FOI legislation. Houlihan was ensconced in the Mayor's
Office of Intergovernmental Affairs—a division of the Mayor's Office
whose major function normally was to facilitate the city's legislative
agendas with other bodies of government, particularly at the state
level. His placement there reflected both an acknowledgment of the
political nature of FOI and the fact that, as he put it, "There was no
place else to put me."<sup>[14](#footnote14)</sup>

Under Houlihan's guidance, the executive order was drafted, circulated
among administration officials for comments and reactions, redrafted,
and proclaimed—a process that was completed within three months of the
new regime's tenure. The content of the order, according to FOI
experts, reflected a quite liberal interpretation of both the kinds of
information now available and the means provided to gain public access
to it. Houlihan and his staff were immediately responsive to the
conception of Affirmative Neighborhood Information. Both the reasons
for their enthusiasm and their contributions to the process of
initiation are important to note. From the first meetings with these
officials, it became clear that they regarded Affirmative Neighborhood
Information as a logical extension of FOI and, further, as an approach
that could help provide solutions to problems already evident in the
implementation of that policy.

These problems were numerous. Virtually no city department was
structured to facilitate public access to information. Further, most
had no central, systematized method for collecting, storing, and
accessing the information it used. Many top and middle-level officials
who were holdovers from previous administrations were at least wary of
the new policy and tended to define publicly available information, in
one staffer's words, as "whatever they've always given out when
somebody bugged them enough." And newly appointed department heads
most often had little idea of what kinds of information their
departments regularly collected, in what form it existed, or how
reliable it was.

As Houlihan began circulating the first draft of the executive order
for departmental comment and reaction, he began to discern two major
areas of concern. The first was legal in nature and was almost
immediately regarded by FOI advocates as "mostly a smoke
screen."<sup>[15](#footnote15)</sup> The second and more serious
concerned the lack of resources to implement the policy. In the short
term, department heads would be required to reshuffle duties so that
the position of information officer could be established and a listing
of data held by the department be produced. In the longer term,
department heads were fearful of the additional workload imposed by
frequent and unpredictable FOI requests from the public.

These resource-oriented concerns led Houlihan to seek outside
technical assistance from a variety of sources. Computer manufacturing
representatives were involved in an assessment of the hardware system
needs of the city's departments. The state's archivists were called in
to help departments decide when stored information could be
discarded. Department heads were urged to include projected FOI
resources in budgetary planning.

In this context of scarce resources, Houlihan and other city officials
began immediately to regard "Affirmative Freedom of information"—as it
was initially labeled—as an efficiency measure. Fearing that a wave of
information requests would follow the issuance of the order, they
viewed the affirmative approach as a mechanism for routinizing public
access to the most frequently requested items, thereby facilitating
departmental compliance with the order.

In addition, the political experiences that Houlihan and others
brought with them to their positions led them to understand
immediately both the public relations potential of affirmative FOI and
the potential benefits to that part of the Harold Washington
constituency consisting of community organizations. Thus, Affirmative
FOI found a "home'" in the bureaucracy and legitimacy within the new
administration. In the meantime, support for affirmative information
was solidifying within city hall: consultations with community
organization leaders were defining the *content* of the data that it
would be most useful to receive. Not surprisingly, virtually all of
the leaders of major CBOs and of coalitions of organizations named
housing data as the most useful general area—more useful, for example,
than data concerning crime, health, economic development, or
education, reflecting accurately the state of community organizing and
development practice in Chicago.

Community groups next gathered to specify priority information items
in the housing area. Which items would be most useful to them? Setting
priorities was necessary both because of the city's limited resources
and because of limits in the CBOs' capacities to absorb and use
information—what one organizer referred to as "the dusty stacks of
paper syndrome" in CBO offices.<sup>[16](#footnote16)</sup> To
facilitate the process of choosing priorities, the city and the
Northwestern group compiled an accurate and detailed "catalog" of all
housing-related items of information collected and stored in computers
in city departments.

Discussions aimed at producing the Housing Data Catalog taught
participants valuable lessons about city-held information. It became
clear, for example, that it was one thing to collect and record data
for internal department use—corners could be cut, short and could be
used, and building inspectors, for instance, would understand and
adjust. But it was quite another thing for information to be collected
with "the public" in mind—stricter standards of accuracy, clearer
recording practices, or at least a process of informing the public
about the "in-house" nature of data were now clearly demanded. Thus
the tone of conversations with departmental data experts was often set
by a series of apologetic explanations concerning the shortcomings of
internally oriented information. As one expert put it, "This stuff was
never meant to see the light of day."

Put somewhat differently, the conviction grew throughout these
meetings with department officials that the city organized and
understood housing information in a framework very different from that
used by CBOs. The city officials' primary way of categorizing
information—based on which department developed, maintained, and used
that information could not have been further removed from the
neighborhood leaders' consciousness. From the community vantage point
it made little or no difference which department or agency was
responsible for a given set of data.

For this reason, the Housing Data Catalog reflected a thorough
recategorization of city-held information into a format corresponding
much more closely to neighborhood perceptions. These categories
included Housing Status Inventory, Building Code Enforcement, Housing
Assistance, and Land Acquisition/Disposition. Each of these broad
categories contained diverse sets of data within it, but each set of
data pointed to a distinguishable kind of use or activity on the part
of CBOs.
 
Interestingly enough, this catalog soon began to revise the
understanding of housing-related data for both the city administrators
and the community-based organizations. For the city people who
produced and dealt with parts of the information on a daily basis, the
catalog both placed their own narrow slice of information within a
broader interdepartmental context and led them toward understanding
the very different perspective on "their" information which prevailed
among community groups. For leaders from these groups, the catalog
both expanded and concretized their understanding of exactly what the
city did know and hold. The process of transforming city information
into a resource—a "commodity" to be assessed, valued, and bargained
for—had begun. And for CBOs, this commodification process began with
the destruction of two opposing myths about city data that had grown
naturally out of their historic adversary relationship with city hall:
one myth held that "the city knows everything, if only they'd let us
get at it," and the other that "the city knows nothing that is useful
to neighborhoods, so we must produce the information which we need
ourselves." The Housing Data Catalog, in contrast, began to establish
a realistically complex marketplace for city data, one that defined
the ground rules anew for community groups. The catalog told community
groups that the city did indeed hold a variety of kinds of information
(but not everything), information whose use-value varied in part
depending on the groups' own definition of priorities, as well as on
the data itself—its subject matter, accuracy, and
timeliness.<sup>[17](#footnote17)</sup>

Further discussions of the catalog with groups outside of city hall
began to clarify not only the groups' information priorities but also
their evolving perceptions about and relationship to the new
administration. They began to limit their expectations of what data
government might provide, and they accepted the fact that this
particular project might be stalled by any number of barriers—for
example, technical, fiscal, legal, or political factors. That is,
computer programming or compatibility issues could stall the project;
the resources available in the city, modest though they were projected
to be, could prove inadequate within the context of a tight budget;
decisions by the corporation counsel could severely limit or prohibit
the availability of information the communities wanted; and
politically motivated opposition to the project could derail
administration support.

The representatives of local community groups were cognizant of the
modest nature of the initial step being proposed. They stressed the
importance of "access to everything the city's got," as one leader put
it. But much more quickly and eagerly than downtown groups, the CBOs
plunged into the discussion of exactly which data items they would
like to receive on a regularized basis. The prospect of "getting the
city to do some of the work we have to do anyway" was immediately
evident. And the specific, localized nature of the information
available appealed directly to those groups' agendas, fostering a
quick and clear recognition that they formed the core constituency for
tlte affirmative information initiative.

After extended discussion aimed at defining criteria for choosing
their data priorities, these groups targeted *information that fit
their agendas, was timely and frequently updated, and which only the
city could provide.*

The only category to fit each of the three criteria was "Building Code
Enforcement." Narrowing the priority choice to this single major
category represented a consensus among diverse members of the users'
panel concerning both the nature of the groups to be served, at least
at the outset of the project, and the programmatic utility of the
information. Everyone agreed that the initial thrust of the project
should be aimed toward providing resources that allowed groups to do
better what many of them were already doing—in effect, stretching
existing agendas. It should be noted, too, that the agreement on the
major category did not end the process of raising cautions among
members of the users' panel. One technical assistance provider, for
instance, warned that asking for "too little" could easily lead the
city to expend all of its time and resources "diddling with the
insignificant" and ignoring broader questions of availability and
access.

Shortly after the construction of sample housing reports based upon
community groups' priorities was completed, the proposal was forwarded
to an interdepartmental group within the administration, along with
what proved to be a wildly optimistic eight-week work plan for
completing the necessary technical steps and facilitating the program.

In fact, troubled political and bureaucratic waters would delay
implementation of Affirmative Neighborhood Information for nearly a
year and a half. The delays were caused by three kinds of problems,
each of which was in some way characteristic of the dilemmas faced by
the new administration. The first area of difficulty involved the
mostly predictable array of bureaucratically defined reservations
about the program—concerns about resources and personnel, about
organization and responsibility for implementation, about legal
questions, about losing control of the information and its uses, and
about revealing shortcomings in the operations of the departments
themselves. The second set of problems involved the shifting status of
FOI responsibility, with four different information officers serving
during the first nine months of the Washington administration (a fifth
was appointed eight months later). The last set of hurdles resulted
from the political pressures on the new administration induced by the
paralyzed Chicago
context. [The mayor's foes, who held the power to block legislation in the city council](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Council_Wars),
were alert to the political ramifications of virtually every policy
initiative. So, for example, when the Department of Neighborhoods
emerged as a major communications conduit between city hall and the
communities—sponsoring popular Neighborhood Forums, coordinating
outreach, and providing support for initiatives like Affirmative
Neighborhood Information—the city council gutted the department's
budget and forced the resignation of its head.

In fact, Washington's opposition was redefining the rules of the
political game. And the new political context created by this
continuing opposition redefined the tone of the administration's
policy discussion in the direction of defensiveness. More and more key
administration officials were convinced that a rapid consolidation of
power by the new regime was out of the question and that the prospect
of four years of maneuvering and confrontation between polarized blocs
seemed ever more likely. The effect of this defensive tone on policy
initiatives was palpable. One department head quoted above now talked
about" reform" as a "process that has to be gradual, quiet, almost
invisible." He was also the first person I heard using a military
metaphor that would become a commonplace over the next year "We've got
to fly low," he explained, "under their [the political opposition's]
radar."

Even within this difficult political context, however, it was
bureaucratic inertia that proved most difficult to overcome. Gaining
support for the new information initiative from ten different city
departments, each with new leadership, all facing severe budget
constraints and a volatile political milieu, proved a daunting
task. Many of the bureaucratically defined objections to affirmative
information concerned a well-defined and deeply held orientation to
knowledge and information generally, and are likely to be applicable
to situations beyond Chicago. At one point in our long series of
discussions, we combined some of the objections we were hearing from
the administrators into a summary package:

*We (the agency/ department/ bureaucracy)*

1. know what information we need for our purposes;
2. understand how and why such information can be adequate for these
   purposes, but not accurate;
3. know how to interpret the information we gather;
4. know what uses are appropriate to this information, and what uses
   are not;
5. know how to determine who is and who is not an appropriate
   recipient of this information; and
6. know how to instruct appropriate recipients in the proper uses of
   this information.

*You, on the other hand (community organizations):*

1. cannot possibly understand the reasons we gather theinformation we
   do;
2. will accuse us of gathering inaccurate information rather
   thaninformation which is adequate for our purposes (but not for
   yours);
3. cannot know how to interpret the information we provide;
4. cannot possibly distinguish between appropriate and inappropriate,
   responsible and irresponsible uses of this
   information. Furthermore,
5. you (community organizations) may very well want to use our own
   information to criticize our operations; and
6. you might even decide to sue us for providing "inaccurate"
   information.

Taken in the aggregate, these two sets of propositions summarize the
most extreme positions taken by city bureaucrats.

Most often, the officials advancing these more protective arguments
were either holdover employees, hired by previous administrations, or
middle level "line" bureaucrats with immediate responsibility for
department functions that might in fact be expected to draw criticism
from community groups (e.g., the Housing Court division of the Law
Department). Other officials, including a number of department heads,
continued to express support for the initiative.

In the final analysis, however, the impetus for breaking the
bureaucratic log jam could be provided only by the decision to
schedule a press conference at which Mayor Washington woald actually
announce the program. This press conference indeed resulted from the
continuing pressure and mounting frustration emanating from the
community groups, who were growing impatient at the delays. The groups
made both the Mayor's Office and the press office aware of their
dissatisfaction, and the response was remarkably rapid. By the time
the press conference occurred, nearly two years had elapsed since the
idea of affirmative information had been conceived. Perhaps there was
a trace of irony in the mayor's voice as he intoned, "Ladies and
gentlemen, for those of you who have asked me continually what I mean
by 'reform,' let me simply point out, *this program* is what reform is
all about."

## Reflections on the Affirmative Information Experiment

What is to be learned from this policy initiation effort? Final
verdicts concerning the viability and usefulness of this newborn, as
well as its capacity to thrive and grow, must await further experience
and analysis. On the other hand, both the conceptual and practical
efforts that defined the inception of this modest model project may
well carry implications ranging far beyond the boundaries of Chicago.
 
Perhaps most importantly, it is clear that the development of
information technologies is now far enough advanced that serious and
potentially fruitful attention can be given to the construction of
decentralist, or democratized, information strategies. The sheer
quantities of data currently collected and stored in centralized
computer facilities, particularly those facilities operated by public
sector organizations, present policymakers with a challenging "fork in
the road" set of choices: systems design may continue to respond
almost exclusively to the technically and bureaucratically determined
needs for larger, faster and more efficient data operation—without
regard to the likely political consequences; or policymakers may
choose to take advantage of the technology's increasing malleability
to rethink the purposes and directions of information policy.

In pursuit of this latter goal, at least three interrelated political
challenges we faced in Chicago may be relevant for other cities as
well.

First, it was necessary to build a set of advocates for decentralized
information in the neighborhoods. CBOs, along with allied city-wide
civic organizations, were found to be both interested in and capable
of defining their own organizational agendas and their corresponding
information needs. They required some measure of technical assistance
in order to expand their knowledge of exactly what kinds of
information the city held, but once that assistance had been provided
they quickly became enthusiastic advocates for the decentralist
thrust.

The basic preconditions for developing constituencies interested in
decentralizing information are ubiquitous. Large governmental bodies
everywhere collect and store information about smaller geographic
units. These locality-based data, covering a wide range of substantive
areas, have potential utility not only for the centrally defined and
operated programs they already serve but for locality-based groupings
of citizens as well. It seems probable that for the variety of types
of local groups, like Chicago's CBOs, the capacity systematically to
collect and store their own data is beyond imagining. But the process
of receiving data collected centrally does not drain scarce
organizational resources and raises the potential for planned,
systematic activity based on locally defined agendas. Furthermore, as
the number of local groups with access to microcomputers continues to
grow, capacities for storing and using information should develop
apace. Electronic transmission and even exchange of data between
central and local organizations may soon be possible to contemplate.

Secondly, in Chicago it was necessary to build the *political
commitment* to a decentralized information thrust. Most public sector
bodies are legally constrained by some version of a FOI Act. But the
Chicago experiment makes clear the conceptual and practical gaps
separating FOI's requirement of passive receptivity to outside
requests and "affirmative information's" commitment to active
distribution.

The crucial first step for political leaders may not depend on any
particular ideological predilections but may be fundamentally
conceptual in nature: information must be viewed as a resource with
*wide distributive potential.* In a time of stagnant or shrinking public
budgets, government leaders everywhere, and particularly in cities,
face the political fallout resulting from program cutbacks. Viewed as
a negotiable resource, even a commodity, information constitutes one
potentially valuable "public good" with significant potential for
expansion. Needless to say, the political credit for this expansion
may provide leaders with more than adequate motivation to innovate.

Finally, as the Chicago case makes clear, it is necessary to build
some level of bureaucratic support if the democratization process is
to go forward. Indeed, we discovered even strong doses of
community-based and top-level political support for the initiative
could not guarantee efficient and enthusiastic cooperation from the
city hall bureaucracies. Probably many of the problems placed in the
path of decentralized information policy by Chicago's bureaucracies
will crop up in other cities as well. Questions concerning accuracy
and liability, ownership and control, resources and efficiency are
germane to planning, taw, and other affected departments in virtually
any municipal government.

Yet the role of the bureaucracies ia the Chicago case was probably
skewed by a number of rarer circumstances. First, of course, Chicago's
bureaucratic structures are larger than those of daily U.S. city
except New York and therefore more unwieldy than most. In addition,
Chicago's unusually stormy and contentious period of political and
governmental transition provided a somewhat unusual context for policy
reform—a context whose effects on the bureaucracies' capacity to
respond can only be judged as mixed. On the one hand, it is certainly
true that most of Mayor Washington's top-level bureaucratic appointees
were quick to grasp the potential political benefits of Affirmative
Neighborhood Information and to understand the initiative as an
integral part not only of a broader commitment to open government but
of a more general populist policy agenda.  Further, the traumatic
transition period represented a context in which policy changes were
*expected*, even within the normally routinized bureaucracies. On the
other hand, the new mayor's appointees were themselves relatively few
in number and almost universally new to the departments they
served. They were faced initially not only with the predictable
administrative challenges—familiarizing themselves with ongoing
structures and functions, with personnel, and with workable levers of
control—but also with a series of dilemmas defined by Chicago's
uniquely polarized political context.

Although a detailed account of the fate and utility of Affirmative
Neighborhood Information is beyond the scope of this chapter, a few
notes may be helpful. The program was in fact institutionalized within
the city's Planning Department. After a couple of months of
experimentation, department staff routinized the monthly reports to
community groups so that they demanded a minimal amount of time and
attention.

The number of community groups receiving the reports quickly grew to
more than 175. From an extensive survey of user groups conducted some
months after the program was initiated, two findings stand out. First
the amount of good will toward the administration that was generated
by this simple outreach program was striking. From many different
kinds of neighborhood groups, from virtually all sections of town,
came comments much like that of a staff director from the Southwest
Side: "We've never before gotten anything that's both free and useful
from the city. It makes us feel like a real partnership is possible. "

A second survey finding worth noting concerns the wide variety of uses
that CBOs found for the reports. Most, predictably enough, used the
reports to identify problem housing and t track buildings through the
court system. Many groups, though, invented new uses for the
reports—for instance, locating rehabilitation and community investment
opportunities, or helping to prevent housing abandonment. The reports
proved to be adaptable to a fairly broad range of community-based
agendas in the housing area.

The usefulness of the reports led CBOs to begin asking for an
expansion of the program and for the inclusion of more kinds of
information. One set of groups, for example, pursued data concerning
tlte city's capital budget, whereas others worked at extracting useful
information about everything from city-owned vacant land to listings
of city contracts. Where these ongoing projects and discussions will
lead in the post-Washington era is difficult to predict.

It is clear that opening up city government in Chicago, given the
situation inherited by the Washington administration in 1983, is a
task that is still far from completed. But in this modest experiment
called Affirmative Neighborhood Information, and in the ongoing
projects to which it led, we have at least begun to meet the challenge
to create in our cities a more democratized politics of public
information. One might hope that more cities will soon accept that
challenge as well.

## NOTES
- <a name="footnote1">1</a>: Other members of the group were Andrew Gordon, John McKnight, Robert Le Bailley, and Eric Nyblad.
- <a name="footnote2">2</a>: Many of these interviews were conducted by Susan Reed.
- <a name="footnote3">3</a>: Interview, Alderman Martin Oberman, July 1984.
- <a name="footnote4">4</a>: Interview, Professor Dick Simpson, former alderman, July 1984.
- <a name="footnote5">5</a>: Ibid.
- <a name="footnote6">6</a>: Interview, Better Government Association, July 1984.
- <a name="footnote7">7</a>: Interview, Alderman Oberman.
- <a name="footnote8">8</a>: Interviews, former aldermen, August 1984.
- <a name="footnote9">9</a>: Ibid.
- <a name="footnote10">10</a>: Ibid.
- <a name="footnote11">11</a>: Blueprint of Chicago Government: A Study for Mayor Harold Washington by the Agency Review Unit of the Transition Team, May 1983, Executive Summary, p. 2.
- <a name="footnote12">12</a>: Interview, city employee, September 1984.
- <a name="footnote13">13</a>: Ibid.
- <a name="footnote14">14</a>: Interview, FOI official, August 1983.
- <a name="footnote15">15</a>: Ibid.
- <a name="footnote16">16</a>: Interview, community organizer, 1984.
- <a name="footnote17">17</a>: Catalog available from the Center for Urban Affairs and Policy Research, Northwestern University.
Interview, community organizer, 1984.
Catalog available from the Center for Urban Affairs and Policy Research,
Northwestern University.

# Discussion Notes
